Definition:
Population Census is the total process of collecting, compiling, analyzing and disseminating demographic, economic and social data pertaining, at a specific time, of all persons in a country or a well-defined part of a country.
It also provides the trends in population characteristics.
The Indian Census is one of the largest administrative exercises undertaken in the world.
Nodal Ministry:
The decennial Census is conducted by the Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs.
Until 1951, the Census Organisation was set up on an ad-hoc basis for each Census.
Legal/Constitutional Backing:
Census is conducted under the provisions of the Census Act, 1948.
The bill for this Act was piloted by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the then Home Minister of India.
The population census is a Union subject under Article 246 of India Constitution.
It is listed at serial number 69 of the seventh schedule of the constitution.
Confidentiality of Information:
The information collected during the population Census is so confidential that it is not even accessible to the courts of law.
The confidentiality is guaranteed by the Census Act, 1948. The law specifies penalties for both public and census officials for non-compliance or violation of any provision of the Act.
Significance of Census:
Source of Information: The Indian Census is the largest single source of a variety of statistical information on different characteristics of the people of India.
Researchers and Demographers use census data to analyze growth and trends of population and make projections.
Good Governance: The data collected through the census is used for administration, planning and policy making as well as management and evaluation of various programmes by the Government.
Demarcation: Census data is also used for demarcation of constituencies and allocation of representation to Parliament, State legislative assemblies and the local bodies.
Better Access for Businesses: The census data is also important for business houses and industries for strengthening and planning their business for penetration into areas, which had hitherto remained, uncovered.
Giving Grants: Finance Commission provides grants to the states on the basis of population figures available from the Census data.
History of Census
Ancient and Medieval Period:
Rigveda: The earliest literature 'Rig-Veda' reveals that some kind of population count was maintained during 800-600 BC in India.
Arthashastra: 'Arthashastra' by 'Kautilya' written in the 3rd Century BC prescribed the collection of population statistics as a measure of state policy for taxation.
Ain-i-Akbari: During the regime of the Mughal king Akbar, the administrative report 'Ain-e-Akbari' also included comprehensive data pertaining to population, industry, wealth and many other characteristics.
Pre-independence Period:
Initial Attempts:
The history of the census began with 1800 when England had begun its Census.
In its continuation, a census was conducted in Allahabad (1824) and in Banaras (1827-28) by James Prinsep.
The first complete census of an Indian city was conducted in 1830 by Henry Walter in Dacca (now Dhaka).
The Second Census was conducted in 1836-37 by Fort St. George.
In 1849, the Government of India ordered the local governments to conduct quinquennial (five-yearly) returns of population.
First Non-synchronous Census: It was conducted in India in 1872 during the reign of Governor-General Lord Mayo.
First Synchronous Census: The first synchronous census was taken under British rule on February 17, 1881, by W.C. Plowden (Census Commissioner of India).
Since then, censuses have been undertaken uninterruptedly once every ten years.
Major Events/Findings in India’s Census
First Census (1881):
It laid main emphasis on the classification of demographic, economic and social characteristics of the entire continent of British India (except Kashmir and French and Portuguese colonies).
Second Census (1891):
It was conducted almost on the same pattern as of the 1881 census.
Efforts were made for 100% coverage and the Upper part of present-day Burma, Kashmir and Sikkim were also included.
Third Census (1901):
In this Census, Balochistan, Rajputana, Andaman Nicobar, Burma, Punjab and remote areas of Kashmir were also included.
Fifth Census (1921):
The decade of 1911-21 has been the only one till now to witness a decadal population decline of 0.31%.
This was the decade that ended in the flu pandemic of 1918 which cost at least 12 million lives.
India’s population was continuously increasing until Census 1921 and still has been doing so after the 1921 Census.
Therefore, the census year of 1921 is called the year of “The Great Divide” in the demographic history of India.
Eleventh Census (1971):
It was the second Census after independence.
It added a question for information on fertility for currently married women.
Thirteenth Census (1991):
It was the fifth Census of independent India.
In this Census, the concept of literacy was changed and the children of the 7+ age group were considered literate (as compared to 1981 when children up to the age group of 4+ were treated as literate).
Fourteenth Census (2001):
It witnessed a quantum leap in the technology front.
The schedules for the phases were scanned through high speed scanners and handwritten data from the schedules were converted into digitized form through Intelligent Character Reading (ICR).
An ICR captures handwriting from image files. It is an advanced version of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology in which printed characters are captured.
Fifteenth Census (2011):
In the 2011 Census, significant fall in case of EAG States (Empowered action group states: UP, Uttarakhand, Bihar, Jharkhand, MP, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan & Orissa) was noticed for the first time.
Sixteenth Census (2021):
Census 2021 was postponed owing to the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic.
However, it will be the first digital Census, also with a provision for self-enumeration.
It is for the first time that information of households headed by a person from the Transgender Community and members living in the family will be collected.
Earlier there was a column for male and female only.
Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC)
About:
The Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC) was conducted in 2011 for the first time since 1931.
It seeks to canvass every Indian family in rural and urban India, and ask about their:
Economic status, to allow Central/State authorities to come up with a range of indicators of deprivation which could be used by each authority to define a poor or deprived person.
Specific caste name, to allow the government to re-evaluate which caste groups are economically worse off and which are better off.
Difference Between Census & SECC:
Field of Coverage: The Census provides a portrait of the Indian population while the SECC is a tool to identify beneficiaries of state support.
Confidentiality of Data: The Census data is considered confidential, whereas the data of SECC is open for use by Government departments to grant and/or restrict benefits to the people.
Significance of SECC:
Better Mapping of Inequalities: SECC has the potential to allow for a mapping of inequalities at a broader level.
It will be useful to establish statistical justification for preserving caste-based affirmative action programmes or welfare schemes.
Legally Imperative: It is also legally imperative as the courts require a ‘quantifiable data’ to support the existing levels of reservation.
Constitutional Mandate: The Constitution of India also favours conducting a caste census.
Article 340 mandates the appointment of a commission to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes and make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by governments.
Associated Concerns with SECC:
Repercussions of a Caste Census: Caste has an emotive element and thus there exist the political and social repercussions of a caste census.
There have been concerns that counting caste may help solidify or harden identities.
Due to these repercussions, nearly a decade after the SECC, a sizable amount of its data remains unreleased or released only in parts.
Caste is Context-specific: Caste has never been a proxy for class or deprivation in India; it constitutes a distinct kind of embedded discrimination that often transcends class.