Mahatma Gandhi (Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi) is also known as "Bapu" or "Rashtrpita" and "The Father of Nation". The ideals of Mahatma Gandhi were Ahimsa (non-violence) and Satya (truth). He not only contributed to India's freedom struggle but also inspired people across the world and raise their voices against discrimination of caste, colour, religion. He was a simple man with vast ideas and he always gives a message to others that "Be the change you wish to see in the world".

He was born on 2nd October, 1869 in Porbandar, Gujarat. He pursued law for one year at the University of Bombay and later went to University College London and completed his graduation in 1891. After that, he started working in the Bar Council of England. And also went to South Africa, where he experienced racism.

READ| Martyrs' Day (Shaheed Diwas) in India 2023: Know History, Significance, and Facts here

20 interesting facts about Mahatma Gandhi, the leader of the masses.
1. Mahatma Gandhi's mother tongue was Gujarati.

2. He did his schooling at Alfred High School, Rajkot.

3. His birthday (2nd October) is commemorated worldwide as International Day of Nonviolence.

4. He was the youngest child of his parents. He had 2 brothers and 1 sister.

5. Gandhi’s father was Hindu by religion and Modh Baniya by caste.

6. Mahadev Desai was Gandhi’s personal secretary.

7. Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was assassinated in the garden of the former Birla House.

8. Gandhi Ji and famous author Leo Tolstoy interacted with each other through letters.

9. Gandhi Ji set up a small colony, Tolstoy Farm at an 1100 acre site, 21 miles from Johannesburg, South Africa for his colleagues in the Satyagraha struggle.

10. In 1930, he led the Dandi Salt March, and in 1942, he launched the Quit India Movement during the freedom struggle.

11. He not only fought for Independence but also demanded fair treatment for the untouchables, lower caste, and also did several fasts in support of them. He also called untouchables Harijans meaning "children of God".

12. Gandhi in 1982 is an epic historical drama film based on Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi won the Academic Award for the best motion picture.